PY360 CONCEPT GLOSSARY
======================
A Reference Guide to Mainframe and MVS Terminology
Python/360 MVS OS Mainframe Simulator V1.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Use FIND <term> to locate a specific entry.
Terms are listed alphabetically.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1403 PRINTER
  The IBM 1403 chain printer, introduced with the System/360 in 1964.
  Capable of printing up to 1,100 lines per minute, it was the
  workhorse output device of the mainframe era. Output was produced
  on wide greenbar paper (132 columns). In PY360, the 1403 is
  simulated by routing SYSOUT to the spool\printout.txt file.
  The distinctive sound of the 1403 chain printer was one of the
  most recognizable sounds of any data center of the era.

3270 TERMINAL
  The IBM 3270 family of display terminals, introduced in 1971.
  Connected to mainframes via coaxial cable, the 3270 was a
  block-mode terminal - meaning keystrokes were buffered locally
  and sent to the host only when ENTER or a PF key was pressed.
  The Model 2 variant offered an 80x24 character display with
  a distinctive green phosphor screen. PY360 simulates the Model 2
  3270 experience using a custom tkinter terminal window.

ABENDral
  ABnormal END. An abend occurs when a program terminates
  unexpectedly due to an error condition. On MVS, abends produce
  a condition code of 8 or higher and may generate a system dump
  for diagnostic purposes. In PY360, a REXX program that encounters
  a fatal error returns RC=12.

ASA CARRIAGE CONTROL
  American Standards Association carriage control characters used
  in mainframe printer output. The first character of each print
  line controls vertical spacing:
    ' ' (space) - Single space before printing
    '0'         - Double space before printing
    '-'         - Triple space before printing
    '1'         - Skip to top of new page
  PY360 honors ASA carriage control in spool output formatting.

BATCH PROCESSING
  The execution of predefined jobs without user interaction.
  Jobs are submitted to JES2 via JCL, queued, executed in order,
  and their output routed to the spool. Batch processing was the
  dominant computing model before interactive terminals became
  common. On real MVS systems, batch jobs could run overnight
  while operators monitored progress from the master console.
  In PY360, batch jobs are submitted from menu option 5 BATCH.

CATALOG
  A directory of all datasets known to the system, storing their
  names, locations, and attributes. On real MVS, the system catalog
  (SYSCATLG) was a VSAM dataset. In PY360, the catalog is stored
  as catalog.json in the PY360 root directory, mapping DSNs to
  their physical file paths on the Windows host system.

CLASS
  In JCL, the CLASS parameter on the JOB statement defines the
  job class, which determined which initiators could process the
  job. Different classes had different priorities and resource
  limits. Common classes were A through Z. In PY360 the CLASS
  parameter is accepted but not enforced.

CONDITION CODE (CC)
  A numeric value returned by a program or job step indicating
  its completion status. Standard values:
    0    - Successful completion
    4    - Warning - completed with minor issues
    8    - Error - completed with significant issues
    12   - Severe error
    16   - Terminal error - job should not continue
  In JCL, subsequent steps can test the condition code of prior
  steps and execute conditionally.

CONSOLE
  The master operator console, used to monitor and control the
  MVS system. Operators entered commands and received system
  messages at the console. In PY360, the Windows CMD window
  serves as the operator console during IPL.

DASD
  Direct Access Storage Device. The mainframe equivalent of a
  hard drive, allowing any record to be accessed directly without
  reading through preceding records. Early DASD units like the
  IBM 2314 and 3330 were large cabinet-sized devices. DASD volumes
  are identified by a six-character VOLSER (volume serial number).
  In PY360, DASD is simulated by the datasets\ directory structure.

DATA CONTROL BLOCK (DCB)
  A control block describing the physical characteristics of a
  dataset, including record format (RECFM), logical record length
  (LRECL), and block size (BLKSIZE). DCB parameters are specified
  in JCL DD statements and stored in the dataset catalog.

DATASET (DSN)
  A named collection of related data stored on DASD, equivalent
  to a file in modern computing. Dataset names follow strict IBM
  conventions: dot-separated qualifiers, each 1-8 characters,
  maximum 44 characters total, starting with an alpha character.
  Example: USER.DAVE.SOURCE
  In PY360, datasets are stored as text files under the datasets\
  directory, with the DSN structure mirrored in the folder hierarchy.

DD STATEMENT
  Data Definition statement in JCL. Defines a dataset used by
  a job step, associating a logical name (ddname) with a physical
  dataset or output destination. Common DD parameters:
    DSN=    - Dataset name
    DISP=   - Disposition (SHR, OLD, NEW, MOD)
    SYSOUT= - Route output to spool (SYSOUT=*)
  Example: //SYSIN DD DSN=USER.DAVE.MYPROG,DISP=SHR

DISP
  Disposition parameter in a JCL DD statement. Specifies how the
  dataset should be treated at the start and end of the job step:
    SHR  - Dataset exists, shared access
    OLD  - Dataset exists, exclusive access
    NEW  - Dataset is newly created
    MOD  - Extend an existing dataset
  In PY360, DISP is accepted in JCL but SHR and OLD are treated
  identically since PY360 is single-user.

DSN
  See DATASET.

EXEC STATEMENT
  The JCL statement that identifies the program or cataloged
  procedure to be executed in a job step.
  Example: //STEP1 EXEC PGM=REXXRUN
  In PY360, supported PGMs are:
    REXXRUN  - Execute a REXX program
    IEFBR14  - IBM null program (does nothing)

IEFBR14
  A famous IBM utility program consisting of just two machine
  instructions that immediately return control to the system.
  Used in JCL to allocate or delete datasets via DD statements
  without actually running any program logic. A staple of
  mainframe culture and humor - every mainframe programmer knows
  IEFBR14. In PY360, IEFBR14 is supported as a null step.

INITIATOR
  A JES2 address space that reads jobs from the input queue and
  executes them. Multiple initiators allow multiple jobs to run
  concurrently. Each initiator is assigned job classes it will
  process. PY360 simulates two initiators in its IPL messages.

IPL
  Initial Program Load. The mainframe equivalent of booting a
  computer. During IPL, the nucleus (operating system kernel)
  is loaded from DASD into memory, devices are brought online,
  and subsystems like JES2 are started. On real systems, IPL
  required specifying the DASD address containing the nucleus.
  In PY360, IPL is initiated by typing IPL 201 at the boot prompt.

ISPF
  Interactive System Productivity Facility. IBM's full-screen
  menu-driven interface for MVS, providing editors, file managers,
  and utilities through a consistent panel-based interface. ISPF
  became the standard way users interacted with MVS systems.
  PY360 simulates ISPF's look and feel including the primary
  option menu, editor, browse, and utility functions.

JCL
  Job Control Language. The scripting language used to submit
  batch jobs on MVS systems. JCL statements begin with //
  and define the job, its steps, and the datasets used.
  JCL was notorious for its rigid syntax and cryptic error
  messages - a rite of passage for every mainframe programmer.
  PY360 supports a practical subset of JCL sufficient for
  running REXX programs in batch mode.

JES2
  Job Entry Subsystem 2. The IBM subsystem responsible for
  receiving jobs, scheduling them for execution, managing the
  spool, and distributing output. JES2 messages begin with
  $HASP (named after the Houston Automatic Spooling Priority
  system from which it descended). In PY360, JES2 is simulated
  by the jcl.py and spool.py modules.

JOB STATEMENT
  The first JCL statement in a job, identifying the job and
  specifying its processing requirements.
  Example: //MYJOB JOB (ACCT),'PROGRAMMER',CLASS=A,MSGCLASS=A
  Parameters:
    jobname  - 1-8 character job identifier
    acct     - Account information (positional)
    CLASS    - Job class
    MSGCLASS - Output class for job log messages

LRECL
  Logical Record Length. The length in bytes of each logical
  record in a dataset. For fixed-length records (RECFM=FB),
  all records are exactly LRECL bytes. The standard mainframe
  LRECL of 80 reflects the 80-column punched card.
  PY360 defaults to LRECL=80 for all new datasets.

MEMBER
  A named component within a Partitioned Dataset (PDS). Members
  allow multiple programs or data items to be stored within a
  single dataset, similar to files within a folder. Members are
  referenced using parenthetical notation:
  USER.DAVE.SOURCE(MYPROG)
  PY360 plans to support PDS members in a future release.

MSGCLASS
  The output class for JCL job log messages. Determines where
  JES2 routes the job's system messages and JCL listing.
  In PY360, all job messages go to the printer spool regardless
  of MSGCLASS.

MVS
  Multiple Virtual Storage. IBM's flagship mainframe operating
  system, introduced in 1974 as an evolution of OS/360. MVS
  provided each program with its own virtual address space,
  greatly simplifying memory management. MVS evolved through
  MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, OS/390, and eventually z/OS, which runs
  on IBM mainframes today.

NUCLEUS
  The core of the MVS operating system, loaded into memory
  during IPL. The nucleus contains the fundamental supervisor
  routines that manage the system. During IPL the message
  IEA101I indicates nucleus loading is complete.

OIA
  Operator Information Area. The status line at the bottom of
  a 3270 terminal display, showing system status, cursor position,
  insert mode, and connection information. PY360 simulates the
  OIA with a status bar showing system name, userid, time, and
  cursor position.

PDS
  Partitioned Dataset. A dataset organized as a directory of
  named members, similar to a folder containing files. PDS
  datasets were used extensively for storing programs, JCL
  procedures, and source code. See also MEMBER.

PF KEYS
  Program Function keys. The 3270 terminal had 12 or 24 PF keys
  (also called function keys) that sent predefined commands to
  the host application. ISPF standardized PF key assignments:
    F1  = HELP
    F3  = END/EXIT
    F7  = UP (scroll back)
    F8  = DOWN (scroll forward)
    F10 = LEFT
    F11 = RIGHT
  PY360 supports F1 through F12 with ISPF-standard assignments.

READY
  The TSO command prompt, displayed when a user is logged on
  to TSO but not running an application. At the READY prompt,
  users can enter TSO commands or start applications like ISPF.
  In PY360, the READY prompt appears after logging off from ISPF,
  allowing LOGON, APPLS, or SHUTDOWN commands.

RECFM
  Record Format. Defines how records are organized within a
  dataset:
    F   - Fixed length, unblocked
    FB  - Fixed length, Blocked (most common)
    V   - Variable length, unblocked
    VB  - Variable length, Blocked
  PY360 defaults to RECFM=FB for all new datasets.

REXX
  Restructured Extended Executor. A powerful, easy-to-learn
  scripting language developed by IBM's Mike Cowlishaw in 1979.
  REXX became the standard scripting language for MVS and VM
  systems, valued for its clean syntax and powerful string
  handling. PY360 includes a REXX interpreter supporting
  variables, loops, conditionals, and built-in functions.

SMF
  System Management Facility. The MVS component responsible for
  collecting system activity data for accounting, performance
  monitoring, and capacity planning. SMF records were written
  to a dedicated dataset and processed by reporting programs.

SPOOL
  Simultaneous Peripheral Operations OnLine. A technique where
  output destined for slow devices like printers is written to
  fast DASD first, then printed later. JES2 manages the MVS
  spool. In PY360, the spool is simulated by files in the
  spool\ directory, viewable from menu option 6 SPOOL.

STEP
  A unit of work within a JCL job, defined by an EXEC statement.
  A job may contain multiple steps executed sequentially. Each
  step runs one program and has its own set of DD statements.
  Steps produce condition codes that subsequent steps can test.

SYSIN
  A DD name conventionally used for a program's primary input.
  In PY360 JCL, SYSIN points to the REXX program dataset that
  REXXRUN will execute.

SYSOUT
  A DD name conventionally used for a program's primary output,
  routed to the spool via SYSOUT=*. In PY360, SYSOUT output
  is written to the printer spool file.

SYSPLEX
  A group of MVS systems that cooperate as a single computing
  resource, sharing workload and data. Introduced with MVS/ESA
  in the early 1990s. In PY360, the SYSPLEX name is defined
  in PY360.cfg and displayed during IPL.

TSO
  Time Sharing Option. The MVS subsystem providing interactive
  terminal access to the system. TSO allowed multiple users to
  share the mainframe simultaneously, each receiving a portion
  of system resources. ISPF ran as a TSO application.
  PY360 simulates the TSO environment including the READY prompt.

VOLSER
  Volume Serial number. A six-character identifier assigned to
  each DASD volume, used to locate datasets across multiple
  disk drives. Typical volsers reflected their purpose:
  SYSVOL, USRVOL, WORK01, etc. In PY360, volumes are defined
  in PY360.cfg and simulated by subdirectories.

VSAM
  Virtual Storage Access Method. IBM's advanced file management
  system supporting keyed sequential (KSDS), entry-sequenced
  (ESDS), and relative-record (RRDS) datasets. VSAM was used
  for the system catalog and many application databases.
  VSAM support is planned for a future PY360 release.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
End of PY360 Concept Glossary
For additional help type HELP at any COMMAND ===> prompt
----------------------------------------------------------------------